00:05
COMM: An experiment to deter grizzlies form
stealing hunter's kills hadn't reckoned on
this individual being smarter than the average
bear.
00:24
COMM: Wildlife biologist Heather Reich has
studied bears in the wild for more than a
decade, to better understand how to protect
them.
00:33
HEATHER: We have a car battery hooked up to
a fence charger, and that fence charger is
then actually providing a jolt of electricity
to this deer that we have hanging to see if
we can't help hunters who are hanging out
in the back country that usually have their
kill stolen by a bear.
So the meat is actually carrying an entire
current of electricity.
We just sat back and waited to see what would
happen when the bear did finally come in.
00:56
COMM: The technique is called aversive conditioning
and a small electric shock is just enough
to warn off the bear but not enough to do
it any harm.
01:03
HEATHER: After two weeks of waiting a bear
finally did come in.
He's a young male grizzly that we actually
know in the area um and you can see he comes
in and he does bite on the deer and he gets
a jolt and we thought well that's great.
Y'know we've proved that it's effective.
01:20
HEATHER: What we didn't anticipate was that
that bear was there for fourteen hours.
Often just staring at the deer hanging there
trying to figure out how to get it without
getting shocked.
The next morning, he can hear the clicking
of the energiser on the deer.
And he decided that he needs to change the
environment a little but and you can see him
just moving around.
He doesn't know what he's doing, he just knows
maybe if he changes something it'll make the
shock go away.
He pulled the car battery off of the charger
which completely obviously killed the shock
and it was within ninety seconds of him pulling
that car battery off and hearing the clicking
stop that he went in and for all he was worth
pulled that deer down and the meat pole swung
into the energiser and destroyed that and
he got his deer.
02:09
HEATHER: Outsmarted us again, and when we
came onto that site all we see is that the
deer is gone, the place is a mess, the energiser
is in pieces on the ground and we figured
the bear just got so mad that he tore the
site apart.
It wasn't until we saw the video that we actually
saw how that all happened.
And it wasn't even the bear that destroyed
the energised it was just a by-product.
02:32
COMM: Despite the initial failure of the experiment
and her professional photographer husband
Derek, a valuable insight into the bear's
tenacity and ingenuity.